Hi there. This is going to be a
very quick tutorial on how to get up
to speed in the VIM editor, which is
one of the common editors available on Unix
systems, the other being Emacs. I happen to
like them a lot, I think it's a
great editor and I use it extensively. But
some people don't love it. So I will
show you how to exit it if you
accidentally ever end up in VIM, which is
a common question. So one thing that, well
first things first, if you open, if you
type VIM and then open a file, it
will read the file, if the file doesn't
exist, it will create one for you. And
in VAM you start in what we call
command mode. And command mode means that you
can move around the file. I can either
move with the arrow keys or with the
special keys on the home row, namely H,
J, K, and L on the home row.
Here's how it works. J goes down, K
goes up, H goes to the left, and
L goes to the right. And the nice
thing about that is that you don't need
to move your hand from the home row,
so it's very, fast to actually go left,
right, etcetera. Some of the other keys that
are, interesting and also very accessible are, to
go to the next word, just type w
and it will go word by word and
it defines words sometimes a little strangely but
it will go word to word by word.
If you wanna go backwards through words, just
b, we'll go back through words. You can
also do things like control f to go
page down and control up, control b to
go page up. If you wanna go to
a particular line, you can just type colon
and then the line number. So colon seven
will go to line seven. You could also
type seven and then uppercase g. Let's try
a different one. Let's say, let's from here
let's go five uppercase g and it goes
right there. We could have also typed the
colon key to do that. If you wanna
go to the top of the file, g
g, lowercase g, lowercase g gets right to
the top. Uppercase g on its own goes
right to the bottom of the file. So
lots of quick ways to get around the
file when you're in command mode. Okay? If
you actually do wanna type text and an
editor, you generally do, you can go into
what we call insert mode. And in insert
mode, you can, you just type the I
key and notice down here it actually says
that you are in insert mode and that
means that you can now type things. Okay,
like that. Alright. And you can use the
backspace key and so forth and the arrow
keys do work in command mode. In the
original VI editor they did not as it
turns out but in here they do. And
so there's lots of other ones if you
wanna delete a line you hit d twice,
d d deletes the line, etcetera. But lots
of people ask how do I exit VIM
because I'm not a VIM person. Well, first
things first to go out of insert mode.
If I was in insert mode, I wanna
go out of insert mode, I type the
escape key. And I just hit the escape
key and that takes us back to command
mode. And then to quit, you type colon
q and that will quit. Now, if there
are no changes that will quit. If I
hit enter, it says no right since last
change, add exclamation point to override. So if
I did colon q exclamation point, it would
save without my changes. Let's say I actually
wanna save the changes, you can do colon
w, that will write the file and save
the changes like that. You can also do
colon w q, which will quit the, program
after writing the changes. I like to abbreviate
that with whatever reason this is the abbreviation,
it's colon x means basically exit with saving
your changes. Okay, and that will exit you
out of VIM. Okay, what else can we
do with VIM that's kinda cool? We can
search for things. If you type slash and
then start typing something like for instance, print
and then enter, it will jump to the
first line that has print on it. If
I was back up at the top and
I just typed slash o, it will find
the first instance of o, which is kind
of nice. But what if that wasn't the
one I wanted to do? Well, all I
need to do is hit lowercase n and
it will find the next one and lowercase
m will find the next one. If I
keep hitting lowercase n, it'll just kind of
cycle through the whole file. If I wanna
go back to a previous o for instance,
I would type shift n and that's how
it works. Okay. So very easy to find
things, very easy to do that. Other interesting
things, if I wanna start editing text at
the end of this line, I can type
the a, uppercase a and I go into
insert mode at the end of the line.
Sometimes that's important. Right? If I wanna go
to the beginning of the line in command
mode, I just type zero. If I wanna
go to the end, I type dollar sign
and you might be saying to yourself, these
are weird things to remember and I agree.
Some of the things are a little bit
hard to remember the first few times you
do them but the more you get used
to it the faster and faster you will
be as you go through learning VIM. So
there's lots and lots to learn, you can
check out a zillion different tutorials online, in
fact there's a tutorial built into the Unix
system called VIMTutor which will bring up VimTutor
and it says here's how you actually do
it and if you scroll down it will
say lesson one, moving the cursor and it
tells you how to move the cursor, etcetera,
etcetera. And you should maybe practice that if
you want. There is another very cool VIM
tutor if you want to go to the
internet and type VIM adventures. Type VIM adventures
it will bring up a VIM adventures there
and it is a little game to show
you how to do this. So you use
the use the little keys, hooray, etcetera and
you go and you you can look at
lots of different, fun things. And, there's sound
on here. I don't know if you can
hear the sound, you probably can't, but there's
sound coming through my headphones. So it's a
it's a fun game to learn how to
use VIM. So anyway, that's VIM. I think
it is a great editor. It does have
a bit of a steep learning curve. You
don't learn VIM in one day, but if
you keep learning, over time, you will become
very, very fast. And the other nice thing
about VIM is it's available on virtually every
Linux system, kinda straight out of the box.
If VIM isn't there, then VI is and
VI is, what VIM is based on. So
that is VIM. Thanks.